Hi, my name is Charles Circlaeys,
and in this talk,
we will dive into scrolling
in animation hitches in the
commit phase of the render loop.
iOS uses the render loop
to display your views.
Touch events are sent to your app,
it responds by changing its views,
and those views are rendered
onto the display by iOS.
We will focus on finding and
fixing animation hitches in the
commit phase of the render loop.
To learn about the entire
render loop and what is a hitch,
please watch the video
"Explore UI Animation Hitches
and the Render Loop".
We will first look into what
defines a commit transaction.
Use Instruments to find hitches.
and we will share our recommendations
to avoid commit hitches.
Let's start by defining
a commit transaction.
Here, we have an example of an
app's view hierarchy that is
currently waiting for events.
After it receives a touch event,
a view responds to it and processes the
event by changing the background color
or the frame for some of its subviews.
The system records that these subviews
will require a layout or display
during the next commit transaction.
During the commit transaction,
the views that needed display or
layout will be updated accordingly by
calling drawRect or layoutSubviews.
Let's take a look at the different phases
involved during a commit transaction.
There are four steps: the layout phase,
the display phase, the prepare phase,
and finally, the commit phase.
During the layout phase,
LayoutSubViews will be called for
every view that requires a layout.
You can mark a layout needed by:
changing a view's position,
adding or removing views,
or explicitly call
SetNeedsLayout on the view.
During the display phase,
drawRect will be called for
every view that requires display.
You can indicate that display is
needed by adding views to the view
hierarchy that override drawRect,
or by calling setNeedsDisplay explicitly.
During the prepare phase,
images that haven't been decoded yet
will be decoded during this step.
This kind of operation can take
considerable time for large images.
Also,
if an image is in a color format that
the GPU cannot directly work with,
it will be converted during this step.
This will require the image to
be copied instead of sending
a pointer to the original,
which will cost additional
time and memory.
To learn more about optimizing
the images in your app,
watch the "Image and Graphics
Best Practices" video.
Finally, during the commit phase,
the view hierarchy will be
packaged up recursively and
sent to the render server.
Note that deep view hierarchies
will take longer to be packaged up.
Now that we have described the
details of a commit transaction,
let's move to our second topic:
find hitches with Instruments.
In Xcode 12,
we released a new Instrument template
to profile hitches in your apps.
This will help you to visualize
and investigate the render loop
for the hitching frames detected.
Let's look at some hitches
in our example app.
We will record a trace in Instruments
as we scroll in our application.
So here we have a recorded trace
of our scrolling performance,
and we can see all the hitches detected.
Let's take a closer look at the hitch 16.
We can see on the left all the tracks
corresponding to the render loop
phases required to compose the frames.
The hitches track shows the
hitches and their durations.
The User Events track shows
the user events associated
with the hitching frame.
The commits track shows the
commit phases and the processes
that committed during this phase.
Patrick will talk more about the
renders and GPU tracks in "Demystify and
Eliminate Hitches in the Render Phase".
The Frame Lifetimes track
shows the entire duration to
compose the hitching frame.
The built-in display track shows
all the frames that appeared on
display along with the VSync events.
You can compare the frame lifetime with
the beginning of the hitch duration to
visualize the expected interval that the
frame should have been ready for display.
This interval is called
the acceptable latency.
All time after that
is the hitch duration.
Below the tracks,
we can see detailed metrics for the
hitch when the hitches track is selected.
There are many hitches in our demo app,
but we have been focusing
on the hitch 16 here.
We can see the hitch duration,
the acceptable latency,
and the hitch type.
Hitch type is useful to get a hint
during which phase the frame was delayed,
and where to start investigating.
For this example,
we can see that the selected
hitching frame was caused by
the commit and the GPU phase.
I'd like to find what code is
taking too long in the commit phase,
and thankfully,
the animation hitches template
includes Time Profiler,
so we can see what code is running
when this hitch is occurring.
From here, I can select the interval
I want to investigate,
and search for the process
that was committing.
I can select the main
thread of this process,
and display its call tree.
Now we are able to analyze
which calls might be expensive.
We can see that this call tree is
originated from a commit transaction,
and it shows that we spent
about 10 milliseconds inside a
method called updateTags in our
custom collection view cell.
Let's look at what's in this app.
It is composed of a
common collection view,
and each cell shows:
a photo thumbnail using a UI image view,
some text using UI label,
and some tags using a
custom tag label view.
Let's look at the implementation of
our custom collection view cell class,
and more particularly,
where this method is being called.
Here, we see that we have a property
observer on the menu item.
This property observer will call
update tags in two scenarios:
a valid menu item was set,
or it was set to nil.
In the first scenario,
we pass an array of tags
that we want to display.
In the second scenario,
we pass an empty array to
remove any remaining tags.
Let's take a look inside the
UpdateTags method implementation now.
As expected, we remove all the views from
the view hierarchy in case
of an empty array of tags.
Otherwise,
we create a stack view if needed.
Then, recreate or reuse existing
tag labels for each tag.
After that,
we remove any existing unused tag labels
in case that the previous usage of this
cell had more tags than the new one.
Let's go back to our calling scope and
let's look at the potential problem
now that we have a better knowledge
of how things are implemented.
The customCollectionView cell overrides
the prepareForReuse method that is
called when a cell is dequeued for reuse.
And inside this method,
we set the menu item to nil.
Doing so will cause our second scenario
to happen which removes all the
previous tag labels from the cellView
hierarchy without taking advantage
of our reuse implementation logic.
This means that for every dequeued cell,
we will remove all the
previous label subviews,
and reinstantiate every single
view needed to display our labels.
This is not optimal,
and this might be causing the hitch.
The solution for this is quite simple.
We don't need to clear our menu item,
and we can simply remove
the prepareForUse method
from the implementation.
Now, when we set the new cells menu item,
we can take advantage of the
reusable logic and avoid expensive
view hierarchy operations.
If we record a new trace after our fix,
we notice that we drastically
improved the number of hitches
detected compared to the first trace.
The time profiler in Instruments was
very helpful for finding what code was
taking too long and causing a hitch.
To find out more about time profiler,
watch the Using Time Profiler
in Instruments video.
After learning how to profile
our application with Instruments,
let's discuss some recommendations
to avoid hitches in the commit phase.
Rule number one is to keep
your views lightweight.
To do so,
try to take advantage as much as you
can from the properties available
on CLayer that are GPU accelerated
and avoid CPU custom drawing.
In case that it is justified,
make sure to measure
the performance of it.
Avoid any empty implementations
of drawrect as the system must
do extra work which will require
additional time and memory usage
during the commit transaction.
Try to reuse views as much as possible
to avoid expensive view hierarchy
operations as adding and removing.
Related to removing views,
try to take advantage of the
view property hidden if you
need to stop showing a specific
view during an animation.
This is a lot cheaper.
Rule number two is to reduce
expensive and redundant layout.
Try to only rely on set-needs layout
when you need to update your layout.
Layout if needed will expand
the current transaction
lifetime and can cause hitches.
Most of the time,
you can wait for the next run
loop to update your layout.
Try to use the minimum number of
constraints to avoid increasing
the complexity for solving this.
Finally, a view should only invalidate
itself or its children,
but not its siblings or its parent view.
Otherwise, the view's layout will be
recursively invalidated again.
I recommend you to watch the two
WWDC talks mentioned below to learn
more details about performant layout
and image and graphics best practices.
Now that you understand the
commit transaction pipeline,
you can avoid expensive commits.
You can use the new animation
hitches template in Instruments
to detect and investigate hitches.
You've learned some strategies
for preventing commit hitches,
such as:
Ensure "Prepare for reuse" does not incur
additional work Keep your view hierarchy
shallow and lightweight Avoid expensive
and redundant layouts Also,
be sure to learn about the next phase
of the render loop in the video:
Demystify and eliminate
hitches in the render phase.
Thank you